=head1 Catalyst Advent 2012 Introduction

=head1 OVERVIEW

A bit about the contents of the Advent Calendar and some general thoughts on 
the L<Catalyst> project.

=head1 Didn't Advent Start already?

Yes, we are getting a bit of a late start (although since Advent officially
started on December 2nd, perhaps a bit less late).

=head1 Didn't we way we'd retire Catalyst Advent?

Well, in my mind that was more of a kick in the pants to get more people
involved, since last year the burden of work was carried by far too few people.

=head1 So, what's the 'Year End Review' of Catalyst

So here's my thoughts on the state of Catalyst.  Catalyst continues to be one
of the more popular choices for Modern Perl programmers who are building web
sites / applications.  The code base is pretty mature and we have quite a bit
(probably not enough, but a lot for a Perl project) documentation and examples
floating around.

The community has a number of pretty enthusiastic members, and the number of
people hanging out on the various Catalyst IRC channels continues to be much
higher than any other modern web framework.  So that is the good stuff.

On the other hand Catalyst is facing significant challenges if we want it to
continue to be fresh and relevent as time goes on.  I can see both internal
and external challenges for the project.  Internally, we have an aging codebase
with a lot of backward compatibility hacks, and probably some things in core
that don't belong in core (and some things outside core that should be core).
Although the codebase was converted to L<Moose> a number of years ago, many
of the more important parts of the Catalyst ecosystem have not made the switch
and in addition although Catalyst core uses Moose a lot of the code could be 
significantly cleaned up to make better use of existing Moose features.  Same
thing for the L<Plack> integration work that was completed more than a year ago.
There's a lot of overlap between some of the popular Catalyst plugins and
features that come with L<Plack> and there is no clarity as to how to address
this.

In addition our attempts to replace Catalyst's service lookup features with
the better supported and more featureful L<Bread::Board> has stalled due to
the tremendous difficult in managing this transition without breaking so much
of Catalyst as to render the project without merit.

Again, although many people hang out on the various Catalyst IRC channels,
it seems there's a very small number of people that can actually contribute
to the project. There's a number of reasons for this, part of it is how the
project is currently managed, and part of it is probably the complexity of the
codebase, and part of it is likely the complexity of the various design patterns
that Catalyst uses (Model - View - Controller and Chain of Command plus a bit
of Mediator and some others).

Externally there's a lot of challenge to the idea that a theoretically heavy (
what I mean by this is that the design patterns that Catalyst is build on all
have many papers and academic discussions around them) and full stack solution
is relevent today.  There's a lot of cutting edge web development that is taking
place exclusively on clients (such as in Javascript on the web browser, or in
C# and Java for various smart phone clients) and one could make the argument
that back end applications will focus more on providing well structured web
services, probably in JSON or similar popular standards, and following a REST
paradigm.  Many of the popular mini/micro web frameworks cater to this idea,
and they tend to focus on minimal code / maximum feature delivery.

In such a world, can Catalyst continue to be a good choice for the Modern
Perl programmer?

I personally believe so, although it is clear the use cases for server side
development is going to change and expand.  The fundemental design patterns
that Catalyst strives to deliver are in my mind still very relevent, and I
think they lead you to delivering better code that is easier to test, deploy
and change as requirements change.  It is not clear to me that some of the
popular micro-frameworks achieve this, although I do think that Catalyst could
take a page from the micro-framework book and lose some of the bulk and boiler
plate needed to get started with a meaningful application.

In additional to Catalyst growing and changing with these evolved needs, I
think our community needs to mature as well.  I think we need to have more
hands on engagement with the various intellectual ideas upon which Catalyst
is built, for example.  As people use Catalyst and grapple with issues
around MVC and other topics, it would be great for us to talk about that stuff
and not just code cookbooks.  Perl programmers have always been practical, but
we should always remember that Larry Wall make Perl practical but also in
line with a consistent philisophy about language and how people use languages
to communicate and achieve goals.

=head1 Wait, you aren't going to actually show us some code?

Ok, here's my 'stupid pet trick' so that you didn't read all this in vain.
Quite often when you are first working on a Catalyst application using
DBIx::Class you are messing around a lot with the Schema and it is a big
pain to keep rebuilding a fresh database.  Sometimes I use L<Test::DBIx::Class>
to automatically create and deploy a schema on each application restart.

    package MyApp::Web::Model::DBIC;

    use Moose;
    use Test::DBIx::Class
      -schema_class => 'MyApp::Schema';

    extends 'Catalyst::Model::DBIC::Schema';
 
    __PACKAGE__->config(
      schema_class => 'MyApp::Schema',
      connect_info => [
        sub {Schema()->storage->dbh},
        { on_connect_call => sub { Schema()->install_fixtures } },
      ]);

Please note with the above you will lose all your data for each restart of the
application, unless you save or dump it in some manner.  Also, note that
L<Test::DBIx::Class> imports C<Schema> as well as a few other things into your
namespace, so you might want to review the documentation on that to know what
you are getting into.

You'll need to create the method C<install_fixtures> in C<MyApp::Schema> if you
want to install some seed or development data.

Another useful variation of this trick is to move this connect information into
a stand alone configuration file (such as C<myapp_web_test.pl>) for when you are
running automated tests against your application.  For example:

    ## share/etc/myapp_web_test.pl

    use Test::DBIx::Class
      -schema_class=>'MusicBase::Schema',
      -traits=>['Testmysqld'];

  {
    'Model::DBIC' => {
      schema_class => 'MyApp::Schema',
      connect_info => [
        sub {Schema()->storage->dbh},
        { on_connect_call => sub { Schema()->install_fixtures } },
      ],
    },
  };

Then if you start your Catalyst application pointing to this testing configuration
file, you'll get a fresh schema and data for each set of tests that get run.

In this example I am also using the C<Testmysqld> trait so that we run our
automated tests against MySQL instead of the default SQLite.  This is a good
idea to be running your tests against the same database type as your intended
production database, and the Testmysqld trait for L<Test::DBIx::Clas> makes it
pretty easy to use MySQL (it only needs to be installed (not running) and
find-able in $PATH).  You can even use the mysql replication testing trait to
make sure your code runs well in a replicated cluster.

=head1 So What is Next?

This year we are going to kick off Advent with a nine (NINE!!!) article series
by Octavian who is going to walk us through one approach to building up an 
application over time.  Although not all the code is the most modern in approach
(not everyone can use the most recent version of Catalyst on the job, so I think
it is great to have such an extended example that would work well across many
Catalyst versions) there is a clear thinking pattern that runs through it all
and there is a lot of very interesting discussion of some of the design patterns
I mentioned above.  So be sure to read all the words and not just skip right to
the code!

Following we will have our standard grab bags of cookbooks articles and various
musings on Catalyst.

=head1 Summary

Catalyst is a project in transition, and I think the 2012 Advent calendar will
reflect that.  We will have some old and new voices mixing both legacy and
modern approaches to using the framework.  My hope is that it will provoke us
to think more deeply about the future evolution of Catalyst such that it will
continue to be the first, best choice for Modern Perl programmers building the
next generation of web applications.

=head1 Author

John Napiorkowski <jjnapiork@cpan.com> jnap on IRC

=cut
