=head1 See You Next Year!

This concludes Perl L<Catalyst> 2013 Advent.  

I want to thank everyone that helped make this year's Perl L<Catalyst> Advent
season a great time and success.  A number of you stepped up with wonderful
articles and I really think we covered a lot of ground.  For those of you that
made it this far, I hope you got a lot out of what you read and that you can
take some of those ideas and run with them in your personal or professional
projects.  And I hope you have a better idea of what we accomplished with
L<Catalyst> this year and what 2014 might bring.

Hope to see you all on IRC, the mailing list and/or at the next YAPC!

=head1 Announcing Catalyst 'Runner'

We've recently announced the Winter 2014 development cycle (code named "Runner")

L<http://jjnapiorkowski.typepad.com/modern-perl/2013/12/perl-catalyst-runner-new-development-branch-now-open.html>

And we've already posted some development releases to CPAN with cool new stuff
like improved support for filehandle type responses, more use of Plack Middleware
and support for L<Plack::Middleware::HTTPExceptions>.  Go take a look at the code
and the announcement to get involved!

=head1 For More Information

CPAN: L<Catalyst>

Github: L<https://github.com/perl-catalyst/>

Code Repository: L<catagits@git.shadowcat.co.uk:Catalyst-Runtime.git>

Questhub: L<http://questhub.io/realm/perl/explore/latest/tag/catalyst>

Mailing List Info: L<http://lists.scsys.co.uk/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/catalyst>

=head1 Author

John Napiorkowski L<jjnapiork@cpan.org|email:jjnapiork@cpan.org>

=cut
