=head1 Pluggable Modules and Deployable Instances

=head2 Discussed Concepts 

This article discusses  about two catalyst concepts .

1. How chaining can be used to create applications that have a central engine that process core logic and allow independent modules be built on top.

2. Par and creating spawns of the application that can span again and integrate to the master site . The individual spawn can be carried around as a separate application.

=head2 Built Application example

The tutorial is accompanied by a functional and well commented code base at the url :// 


For demonstrating the above mentioned concepts a quiz application has been taken as example.

The final application must be able to 

I). Create quizzes that can be taken on the site or deployed to a trainer's laptop , which the trainer can carry to colleges.The application must make sure that the deployed quiz contains only the required questions in the db , as the questions can be proprietary and the trainer must be able to take only what is necessary. It must also allow a deployed quiz to act as master and create smaller quizzes from it . Ideal when a trainer takes 500 questions and has to train 10 batches with different question set  in the same college.

II). Each created quiz must be able to choose the modules  and the number of questions from each module .
A module can be "choose the correct answer" ,"Fill in the blanks " etc.

III). It must be  possible to build new modules that can work along with the application and yet can be developed independently without any constraints on its internal logic , look and feel.


=head2 Building the application

This tutorial will take you step by step on building such an application . 

=head1 AUTHOR

Antano Solar John
