=head1 Catalyst on Debian

=head2 Introduction

Because Catalyst is a rapidly evolving project, packages supplied by
operating system vendors like Debian, Fedora, Ubuntu and many others have
historically been outdated compared to the stable versions.  In effect,
this limited users of Debian's package management system to outdated versions
of this software.

As a member of the Debian Perl Group that maintains these packages, I admit
that the historical lack of communication and coordination between the two
communities has led to suboptimal support for these important packages.  

In 2009, thanks to the efforts of Matt S. Trout and many others, Debian's
Catalyst packages have been improving.  The idea that Debian's Perl packages
are outdated is an idea that is itself becoming obsolete.  There are many
situations where system-wide Debian packages (and similarly, Ubuntu packages)
can be preferable to installing software manually via CPAN.

=head2 Advantages

Here are some reasons why packages managed by Debian are preferable to
installing packages manually:

=over

=item 1

Unattended installation: the majority of our packages require absolutely no
user interaction during installation, in contrast to installs via CPAN. 

=item 2

Quicker installs for binary packages: since binary packages are pre-built,
installing the package is as simple as unpacking the package and installing
the files to the appropriate locations.  When many modules need to be built
(as with Catalyst and MojoMojo), this can result in a significant time
savings, especially when one considers rebuilding due to upgrades. 

=item 3

No unnecessary updates: if an update contains only changes to documentation
or tests, it does not make sense to waste bandwidth downloading and installing
it.  Our process separates packages with bugfixes and feature additions from
those that have no functional difference to users, saving time, bandwidth
and administrative overhead.

=item 4

Only packages offered by Debian are supported by Debian: if there are bugs
in your Debian software, it is our responsibility to help identify and
correct them.  Often this means coordinating with the upstream software
developers (ie, the Catalyst community) and working toward a solution
together – but our team takes care of this on your behalf.

=item 5

Updates occur with the rest of your system: while upgrading your system
using aptitude, synaptic or another package management tool, your Perl
packages will be updated as well.  This prevents issues where a system
administrator forgets to update CPAN packages periodically, leaving your
systems vulnerable to potential security issues.

=item 6

Important changes are always indicated during package upgrades: if there are
changes to the API of a library which can potentially break applications, a
supplied Debian.NEWS file will display a notice (either in a dialog box or
on the command line) indicating these changes.

=back

This year has seen greatly improved interaction between the Debian Perl Group
and the Catalyst community, which is a trend we'd like to see continue for
many years to come.  As with any open source project, communicating the needs
of both communities and continuing to work together as partners will ultimately
yield the greatest benefit for everyone.

=head2 Quality Assurance

The Debian Perl Group uses several tools to provide quality assurance for
our users.  Chief among them is the Package Entropy Tracker (PET), a dashboard
that shows information like the newest upstream versions of modules.  Our bug
reports are available in Debian's open bug reporting system.

If you have any requests for Catalyst-related modules (or other Perl modules)
that you'd like packaged for Debian, please contact either myself (via IRC
or email) or file a “Request For Package” (RFP) bug. If you have general
questions or would like to chat with us, you're welcome to visit us at any
time - we hang around on irc.debian.org, #debian-perl.

=head1 SEE ALSO

=over

=item *

Our IRC channel, irc.debian.org (OFTC), channel #debian-perl

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Jonathan Yu E<lt>jawnsy@cpan.orgE<gt>
