=head1 2010 Reflections - The Chainsaw Song

Uh-oh, December 1st - time does indeed fly, and it's time to recap what
has happened in our-favorite-language-land. It is my honor to start off
this year's advent calendar with a walk through the changelog of one
of the most popular C<M>'s of your C<MVC> - L<DBIx::Class>.

=head2 The Past

So what exciting has happened with your (hopefully) favorite SQL de-hater?
The answer is - a lot!

First the obligatory numbers: this year up until the latest official release
L<0.08124|http://search.cpan.org/~frew/DBIx-Class-0.08124/> DBIC saw
code and documentation contributions from 42 (no joke!) people in over 1,000
commits, touching over 400 files with a total of over 14,000 non-whitespace
lines of changes! But what do these scary numbers give us?

The killer feature remains
L<resultset chaining|http://search.cpan.org/dist/DBIx-Class/lib/DBIx/Class/ResultSet.pm#Chaining_resultsets>,
but what a facelift it got this year:
L<searches|http://search.cpan.org/dist/DBIx-Class/lib/DBIx/Class/ResultSet.pm#search>,
L<relationship traversals|http://search.cpan.org/dist/DBIx-Class/lib/DBIx/Class/ResultSet.pm#search_related>,
L<set operations|http://search.cpan.org/dist/DBIx-Class-Helpers/lib/DBIx/Class/Helper/ResultSet/SetOperations.pm#DESCRIPTION>,
L<subselects|http://search.cpan.org/dist/DBIx-Class/lib/DBIx/Class/ResultSet.pm#as_subselect_rs>,
L<limits|http://search.cpan.org/dist/DBIx-Class/lib/DBIx/Class/ResultSet.pm#rows>,
L<column slices|http://search.cpan.org/dist/DBIx-Class/lib/DBIx/Class/ResultSet.pm#get_column>
(and by the end of this week
L<custom joins|http://git.shadowcat.co.uk/gitweb/gitweb.cgi?p=dbsrgits/DBIx-Class.git;a=blob;f=lib/DBIx/Class/Relationship/Base.pm;h=8012dd8fcd9ab5f36f26d555f5303f0c826de328;hb=refs/heads/extended_rels#l128>
) - all work together in perfect harmony, producing mind-numbing but fully
functional SQL. Just slap your methods together and DBIC will almost always
do the right thing (these days it even manages to surprise its authors).

Did I mention the mind-numbing SQL? Do you also avoid looking at SQL directly
with the remaining eye? Well no more! Thanks to
L<frew|http://blog.afoolishmanifesto.com/>, L<SQL::Abstract> and by proxy
DBIC now come with an awesome
L<SQL formatter|http://cpansearch.perl.org/src/RIBASUSHI/SQL-Abstract-1.71/script>.
Just add C<DBIC_TRACE_PROFILE=console> to your environment and watch a rainbow
of properly indented SQL dance on your otherwise dull console any time you
request SQL traces with
L<DBIC_TRACE|http://search.cpan.org/dist/DBIx-Class/lib/DBIx/Class/Storage.pm#DBIC_TRACE>
or with
L<< storage->debug|http://search.cpan.org/dist/DBIx-Class/lib/DBIx/Class/Storage.pm#debug >>.
Catalyst/Plack users are not left out in the cold either, thanks to
L<jnap|http://jjnapiorkowski.typepad.com/modern-perl/> and his
L<Plack::Middleware::Debug::DBIC::QueryLog>, which leverages the same
awesome formatting capabilities.

But we surely are taxing the RDBMS with these twisted queries, and the DBA
knows where you live... Fear not! DBIC ships with a wicked join-pruning
optimizer (akin to the one available in PostgreSQL since 9.0). Of course
being internal to DBIC it works on any database, and is more efficient since
it has more metadata about the result sources. Just stack these joins and
nested searches with reckless abandon, and DBIC will do its best to remove
unreferenced C<LEFT JOIN>'s before sending the coveted query to the RDBMS.

So you have a DBA - you are most likely using some opinionated commercial
RDBMS. Thanks to L<Caelum|http://search.cpan.org/~rkitover> DBIC now
supports oddballs like
L<Informix|http://search.cpan.org/dist/DBIx-Class/lib/DBIx/Class/Storage/DBI/Informix.pm>,
L<Firebird and Interbase|http://search.cpan.org/dist/DBIx-Class/lib/DBIx/Class/Storage/DBI/InterBase.pm>,
L<Sybase ASE|http://search.cpan.org/dist/DBIx-Class/lib/DBIx/Class/Storage/DBI/Sybase/ASE.pm> and
L<Sybase SQL Anywhere|http://search.cpan.org/dist/DBIx-Class/lib/DBIx/Class/Storage/DBI/SQLAnywhere.pm>. Note that
"supports" means real support - with proper limit dialects, datetime
formatters, transaction handlers, savepoints, and other fixups and workarounds
for minor but irritating RDBMS-specific quirks.

Outside of the main workflow there are more news:

Thanks to L<frew|http://blog.afoolishmanifesto.com/> DBIC now has a neat stack
of handy helpers, organized in the L<DBIx::Class::Helpers> distribution.
Great for mixing and matching various small utilities to make data retrieval
easier. He also managed to write L<DBIx::Class::DeploymentHandler> - a
replacement for the nice but architecturally limited
L<DBIx::Class::Schema::Versioned>. While it may seem daunting at first, it is
well worth a look, as it makes a lot of advanced stuff possible (and even
easy), like for example in-line data migration during schema upgrades.
Finally in order to attract more followers of the sugar-club, he spilled some
L<DBIx::Class::Candy> to make the life of DBIC newcomers sweeter^Weasier.

L<Caelum|http://search.cpan.org/~rkitover> adopted
L<DBIx::Class::Schema::Loader> and taught it neat tricks on all databases he
could get his hands on. The new generation loaders are more precise, support
more database metadata, and quite importantly choose saner names for
Result Classes and Relationships.

L<goraxe|http://search.cpan.org/~goraxe/> contributed a brand-new fully
moosified control module L<DBIx::Class::Admin>, making it dead simple to write
CLI apps and other control interfaces against your DBIC schema.

Last but not least the
L<repository|http://git.shadowcat.co.uk/gitweb/gitweb.cgi?p=dbsrgits/DBIx-Class.git>
was migrated from SVN to GIT by the awesome L<Haarg|http://haarg.org/>. He not
only properly transferred our non-trivial history, he 
L<blogged|http://blogs.perl.org/users/graham_knop/2010/10/converting-complex-svn-repositories-to-git.html>
L<his way|http://blogs.perl.org/users/graham_knop/2010/10/converting-complex-svn-repositories-to-git---part-2.html>
L<through it|http://blogs.perl.org/users/graham_knop/2010/10/converting-complex-svn-repositories-to-git---part-3.html>
, documenting the bits and pieces necessary to pull off such a complex
migration. As a direct result of this contributing to DBIC got even easier
than before - simply fork our
L<GitHub Mirror|http://github.com/dbsrgits/DBIx-Class>, edit and send pull
requests directly from your browser without ever needing a checkout!

And many other small and big changes by dedicated individuals - my personal
gratitude goes to you all for making DBIC the kick-ass project it is today!

=head2 The Present

But the year is not over yet! As I am writing this two major features are
getting groomed for immediate CPAN release: the already mentioned
L<custom relationships|http://git.shadowcat.co.uk/gitweb/gitweb.cgi?p=dbsrgits/DBIx-Class.git;a=blob;f=lib/DBIx/Class/Relationship/Base.pm;h=8012dd8fcd9ab5f36f26d555f5303f0c826de328;hb=refs/heads/extended_rels#l128>
and C<INSERT ... RETURNING> support for Oracle. Another exciting feature
may land into master before New Year, but it will deserve its own
announcement if it materializes. Suffice to say lots of hopes are set for the
L<post-LPW hackathon|http://lpw2010hackathon.eventbrite.com/> :)

=head2 The Future

Well of course the future depends on B<YOU>! The DBIx::Class team is as active
as ever and is always looking for eager minds striving to make SQL-interaction
even less hateful :) If you have tuits, ideas, comments or plain old questions
stop by our hivemind
L<irc.perl.org#dbix-class|http://chat.mibbit.com/#dbix-class@irc.perl.org>
and become a part of a stellar community of perl hackers (and hopefully a part
of the next 1,000 commits :)

On this note I pass the reins to the next advent author. Once again thank you
all for the awesome ride so far, and for the great things that are yet to come.

Cheers!

-- ribasushi, DBIx::Class chainsaw delegate in residence

=head1 AUTHOR

Peter Rabbitson <ribasushi@cpan.org>
