=head1 Getting Started with Catalyst and jQuery (and jQuery UI)

=head2 A few initial comments

For the duration of this article we'll be assuming that you want to use jQuery
and jQuery-UI with Catalyst, and that you'll be using the Template Toolkit for
your templating engine.  Of course, this is perl and There's More Than One Way
To Do It -- so you can use something else instead of TT, or tweak our 
suggestions a bit.  If you do, things will probably Just Work.   Have fun, and
stay DRY.

This article is aimed at developers new to Catalyst and especially Catalyst
with jQuery.  It is designed to help someone go from 0 to App as quickly as
possible.

The commands in the article assume you're using Linux.  If you aren't, adjust
the commands accordingly (or switch to Linux ;).

=head2 Background knowledge

This article assumes you already know some things.  If you don't,
please follow the provided links to read about a few key topics before continuing
with this article.  You can probably make it through without knowing some
of them, but if you're reading this, all of them will make your life easier.

=over

=item Catalyst (L<http://www.catalystframework.org/>)

The perl MVC framework

=item HTML::FormHandler (L<https://metacpan.org/module/HTML::FormHandler>)

For creating, displaying, and validating forms

=item jQuery (L<http://jquery.com/>)

The Write Less, Do More, JavaScript Library

=item jQuery UI (L<http://jqueryui.com/>)

UI enhancement framework on top of jQuery

=item Template Toolkit (L<http://template-toolkit.org/>)

A fast, flexible and highly extensible template processing system.

=back

=head2 Setting up the project

For our purposes, we'll be working on a project that depicts a pizzaria
(called, creatively, "Pizzaria") that takes orders online.  

=head3 Choosing a namespace

Because our company is called Pizzaria, we're going to call our app the same.
Now, we could simply run

	catalyst.pl Pizzaria

and get an application that's set up like this:

	./Pizzaria
	./Pizzaria/script
	./Pizzaria/script/...
	./Pizzaria/lib
	./Pizzaria/lib/Pizzaria
	./Pizzaria/lib/Pizzaria/Model
	./Pizzaria/lib/Pizzaria/View
	./Pizzaria/lib/Pizzaria/Controller
	./Pizzaria/lib/Pizzaria/Controller/Root.pm
	./Pizzaria/lib/Pizzaria.pm
	./Pizzaria/root
	./Pizzaria/root/static
	./Pizzaria/root/static/images
	./Pizzaria/root/static/images/...
	./Pizzaria/root/favicon.ico
	./Pizzaria/t
	./Pizzaria/t/...

That's fine, but it has one limitation that's sort of needless:  it assumes
that the web interface is the only one we'll be making.  As a matter of good
practice, let's just start off right and name it according to what we're
actually making:  A B<web> interface to our Pizzaria's software.

	$ catalyst.pl Pizzaria::Web
	created "Pizzaria-Web"
	created "Pizzaria-Web/script"
	created "Pizzaria-Web/lib"
	created "Pizzaria-Web/root"
	created "Pizzaria-Web/root/static"
	created "Pizzaria-Web/root/static/images"
	created "Pizzaria-Web/t"
	created "Pizzaria-Web/lib/Pizzaria/Web"
	created "Pizzaria-Web/lib/Pizzaria/Web/Model"
	created "Pizzaria-Web/lib/Pizzaria/Web/View"
	created "Pizzaria-Web/lib/Pizzaria/Web/Controller"
	created "Pizzaria-Web/pizzaria_web.conf"
	created "Pizzaria-Web/lib/Pizzaria/Web.pm"
	created "Pizzaria-Web/lib/Pizzaria/Web/Controller/Root.pm"
	created "Pizzaria-Web/README"
	...

That's better.  Now when we are ready to create other interfaces to our
application, it won't require any refactoring; we'll simply be able to add
Pizzaria::CLI, etc.

Because I like to, I always rename the app's directory to omit the "-Web":

	$ mv Pizzaria-Web Pizzaria
	$ cd Pizzaria

=head3 Setting up jQuery and jQuery UI

For ease, throughout the remainder of this article, I'll refer to jQuery and
jQuery UI as "jQuery".  You may, of course, use jQuery without the UI libs,
and you may use the UI without ever manually utilizing jQuery (though it will
still be loaded as a dependency, of course), but for our purposes, I'll assume
that you're going to be using both.

Because jQuery is a client-side JavaScript library, most of the actual use of
it will be done through the templates.  There's a lot we can do in Catalyst
to make things easier in jQuery, but we'll have to get to those later.  Let's
get started.

=head4 The jQuery Frameworks

First, in setting up our repo, we'll create a place for jQuery to live.
Remember that whatever we put under the ./root/static directory will be
files that we're expecting to access directly with hyperlinks; that means
we can effectively consider this something like the "public API" of our 
application resources.  With that in mind, you want the names to be
semantically meaningful.  And, as always, Do The Right Thing -- don't 
take shortcuts =)

We'll have all our javascript live in C<./root/static/javascript/>.  
Similarly, css will live in C<./root/static/css/>, images in
C<./root/static/images/>, and so forth.  Our templates will live in 
C<./root/src/>.

	$	mkdir -p ./root/static/javascript/ext

We'll put all third-party javascript libs in C<./root/static/javascript/ext/>
and know never to edit anything in there (right? =)  Separating external libs
that way will also help future maintainers and developers to understand how
the application is structured.

Next, we'll download the latest, greatest versions of jQuery and jQuery UI
from their respective web pages (linked above) and unzip them into those 
directories.  When you're done, your directory structure should look like
this:

	./root/static/javascript/ext/jquery
	./root/static/javascript/ext/jquery/jquery-1.4.2.min.js
	./root/static/javascript/ext/jquery-ui
	./root/static/javascript/ext/jquery-ui/AUTHORS.txt
	./root/static/javascript/ext/jquery-ui/jquery-1.4.2.js
	./root/static/javascript/ext/jquery-ui/ui
	./root/static/javascript/ext/jquery-ui/docs
	...

=head4 Plugins (third-party and in-house)

One of the great things about jQuery is the very active user community.  You
should get into the habit of using jQuery plugins liberally; if you choose
them well, they're light-weight, efficient, and very effective.  Let's create
a place for our jQuery plugins to live.

	$ mkdir -p ./root/static/javascript/ext/plugins/jquery
	$ mkdir -p ./root/static/javascript/ext/plugins/jquery-ui

Of course, if we start using other third-party JavaSCript plugins we can
just add them.  For example, if we wanted to use CKEditor, as I did for a 
project at work recently, or Flot, or any other third-party JS lib, 
it would be very easy simply to add the spaces for it.

	$ # mkdir -p ./root/static/javascript/ext/ckeditor
	$ # mkdir -p ./root/static/javascript/ext/plugins/ckeditor

and we can just add files into those spaces as we need to.  (I commented out
the commands below in case someone isn't reading carefully
and blindly copies/pastes all the commands in this article =)

We're also going to want to be developing internal plugins from time to
time, probably.  Let's create a place for those to live as well, for the sake
of completeness.

	$ mkdir -p ./root/static/javascript/plugins/jquery

Now when you want to create a generic jQuery plugin (that's not specific to
a particular part of your application's view domain) just drop it into that
directory.

Great -- now we're ready to get started with our app development.

=head2 Data is everything

Your data is everything.  You can always fix a bad flow of logic in your
controller, or even fix a bunk interface to your models... but if you have
bad data, you're stuck.  For that reason, you should be thinking of your
application as a data management process.  Everything in your application
is about how you create, retreive, update, or delete data (CRUD).

=head3 The Schema

For our purposes, let's assume that you're using MySQL (L<http://www.mysql.com/>)
with L<DBIx::Class> and creating your schema with L<DBIx::Class::Schema::Loader>.
Further, we'll just assume you've already created your schema using the
following SQL:

	CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS `user` (
		id INT(64) NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
		password VARCHAR(32) NOT NULL default '',
		email VARCHAR(32) NOT NULL default '',
		first_name VARCHAR(32) NOT NUL default '',,
		last_name VARCHAR(32) NOT NUL default '',,
		registered TIMESTAMP NOT NULL DEFFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
		PRIMARY KEY (`id`),
		UNIQUE (`email`)
	) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=latin1;

	CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS `order` (
		id INT(64) NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
		user INT(64) NOT NULL DEFAULT '',
		total INT(64) NOT NULL DEFAULT 0,
		created_on TIMESTAMP NOT NULL DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
		FOREIGN KEY (`user`) REFERENCES `user` (`id`)
	) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=latin1;

	-- ... and so on with tables for specials, toppings, or whatever.

=head2 Inputs matter

If the way you store data is critical, then just as critical is the way you
B<acquire> it.  In a web app, much of the time, that's going to be done
through the venerable HTML form.

=head3 Defining Forms

Forms are critical.  They control what information we take in, and when we
validate our data, we validate what's come through our forms.  In fact, 
forms are so critical we don't want them to be treated as second-class
elements of our application; they are key components that deserve focused
attention and first-class status.

Now, for the most part forms we use in one interface are unlikely to be used
others (when was the last time you filled out a form in a CLI?).  For that 
reason, we're going to create a namespace in which to keep our forms; a
dedicated library wing just for web forms.  All forms will go into this
namespace, and no forms will be created without them.  Remember:  forms are 
first-class members of our application; they are the user's interface to 
our database, and our interface to the users.

We'll keep our forms in Pizzaria::Web::Form.  For example, if we want a form
to create/register a new user, it might be in Pizzaria::Web::Form::User::Register, or
if we want to update a user's profile, we could create a new form in
Pizzaria::Web::Form::User::Update.

	$ mkdir -p ./lib/Pizzaria/Web/Form

With a little forethought, we can definitely save ourselves a lot of
repetition.  We already said that the two main functions we want users to
be able to do is register as users and modify their profiles.  It seems
very likely that both forms will have a lot of fields in common, and 
that we'll want the same restraints on fields shared by both forms.  So
how do we usually do that?  Subclassing.  We're going to use the same
concept here.  Let's create a form object for C<Pizzaria::Web::Form::User>,
C<Pizzaria::Web::Form::User::Register>, and C<Pizzaria::Web::Form::User::Update>,
in which our core functionality is described in the first, and the latter
two contain only overriding modifications to the base class.

Let's create a form for creating new users.

	$ mkdir -p ./lib/Pizzaria/Web/Form/User
	$ touch ./lib/Pizzaria/Web/Form/User.pm
	$ touch ./lib/Pizzaria/Web/Form/User/Register.pm
	$ touch ./lib/Pizzaria/Web/Form/User/Update.pm

Great.  Next, let's create our base class in C<Pizzaria::Web::Form::User>.  
Before you go any further, read this excellent introduction to 
HTML::FormHandler (L<http://www.catalyzed.org/2010/03/an-introduction-to-formhandler.html>)
if you haven't already.  We're lifting code from there I<en masse> and life
will be easier for you if you understand what's covered there =)

...

Our ::User package now looks like this:

	package Pizzaria::Web::Form::User;

	use HTML::FormHandler::Moose;
	extends 'HTML::FormHandler::Model::DBIC';
	with 'HTML::FormHandler::Render::Table';

	has '+item_class' => (default => 'User');

	has_field 'first_name' => (type => 'Text');
	has_field 'last_name'  => (type => 'Text');
	has_field 'email'      => (	
		type => 'Email',
		required => 1,
		unique => 1,
	);
	has_field 'password'         => (type => 'Password');
	has_field 'password_confirm' => (type => 'PasswordConf');

	has '+unique_messages' =>	(
		default => sub { 
			{email => 'Email already registered'}
		}
	);

	no HTML::FormHandler::Moose;
	__PACKAGE__->meta->make_immutable;
	1;

Notice that we've omitted the "submit" field.  That's because this base class
is never going to be used directly; it's just a foundation for our other user
form classes.  Now we create our registration form:

	package Pizzaria::Web::Form::User::Register;
	
	use HTML::FormHandler::Moose;
	extends 'Pizzaria::Web::Form::User';
	
	has_field 'submit' => ( type => 'Submit', value => 'Register' );

	no HTML::FormHandler::Moose;
	__PACKAGE__->meta->make_immutable;
	1;

That was easy.  We just added a submit button and ... we're done.  The rest
of the fields were inherited from the base class.  Now, when we want to create
the registration form, we just create an instance of this class and
render/validate/whatever it.  Let's make our user update form as well.

	package Pizzaria::Web::Form::User::Update;
	
	use HTML::FormHandler::Moose;
	extends 'Pizzaria::Web::Form::User';
	
	has_field 'submit' => (type => 'Submit', value => 'Update profile');

	no HTML::FormHandler::Moose;
	__PACKAGE__->meta->make_immutable;
	1;

Drop-dead simple.  We just changed name of the form (C<...::User::Update> and the
value of the submit button, and we're done.  All of our forms can be created and
controlled with that much ease.

=head3 Rendering forms

When it's time to render our forms in our controllers, we can just do this:

	package Pizzaria::Web::Controller::Registration;
	use Moose;
	use namespace::autoclean;

	use Pizzaria::Web::Form::User::Register;

	sub index :Chained('/') :PathPart('register') :Args(0) {
		my ($self, $c) = @_;

		### Or you could do this in /auto or something.
		$c->stash->{forms} = {};

		### Create our registration form.
		$c->stash->{forms}->{register} = Pizzaria::Web::Form::User::Register->new();

		### Process the form with any parameters that were submitted when the page
		### was requested.
		$c->stash->{forms}->{register}->process(params => {%{$c->request->parameters}});
	}

	1;

Then in our template (C<./root/src/registration/index.tt>:

	...
	<div id="register-new-user">
	[% forms.register.render %]
	</div>
	...

Which, for reference, renders our form something like this:

	<div id="register-new-user">
	<form id="form576" method="post" >
	<table>
		
		<tr>
			<td><label class="label" for="first_name">First name: </label></td>
			<td><input type="text" name="first_name" id="first_name" value="" /></td>
		</tr>
		
		<tr>
			<td><label class="label" for="last_name">Last name: </label></td>
			<td><input type="text" name="last_name" id="last_name" value="" /></td>
		</tr>
		
		<tr>
			<td><label class="label" for="email">Email: </label></td>
			<td><input type="text" name="email" id="email" value="" /></td>
		</tr>
			
		<tr>
			<td><label class="label" for="password">Password: </label></td>
			<td><input type="password" name="password" id="password" value="" /></td>
		</tr>
		
		<tr>
			<td><label class="label" for="password_confirm">Password confirm: </label></td>
			<td><input type="password" name="password_confirm" id="password_confirm" value="" /></td>
		</tr>
		
		<tr>
			<td><input type="submit" name="submit" id="submit" value="Register" /></td>
		</tr>
	
	</table>
	</form>
	</div>

=head2 What about jQuery? (a.k.a.:  Plugins!)

Ok, good for us; we can create forms easily ... but how about integration with
jQuery?

Great question.  Let's look at some ways we can spiffy-up our forms with jQuery.
As we mentioned before, when you think jQuery, you should first think:  Plugins!

jQuery's plugin community is like a decentralized CPAN.  If you want to do it,
there's probably a plugin for it.  If you want to do it differently, leverage
existing code to work for you.

Let's take a look at some particular plugins.

=head3 Unobtrusive AJAX with the C<ajaxForm> plugin

If you're like me, you want lots of things to be happening with AJAX.  It lets
you take advantage of the REST aspects of your app, lets you fire off asynchronous
events, looks cool, and brings about world peace.  But how can we use forms 
rendered through L<HTML::FormHandler> and L<the Template Toolkit|Template> (L<http://template-toolkit.org/>)
to make AJAX calls?

Thankfully, someone who calls himself I<malsup> thought of that and gave us a
terrific solution:  the ajaxForm plugin (L<http://jquery.malsup.com/form/>)!

First, of course, unzip the plugin into your javascript plugins directory and
make sure it's getting loaded into the page in your template.

Given the form (depicted previously), we can create a JavaScript file for the
page in C<./root/static/javascript/register/index.tt>:

	// Create an enclosure that localizes the jQuery framework into the $
	// variable to avoid collisions with other frameworks.
	;(function ($) {
	
		// Execute this function when the document has finished loading and 
		// is ready for processing.
		$(document).ready(function () {
			
			// Ajaxify our form.  Find it with a CSS 3 selector.
			$("#register-new-user form").ajaxForm({
				beforeSubmit: function () { /* ... */ }
			,	success:      function () { /* ... */ }
			})

		})

	})(jQuery)

That's it =)  Now you can convert any form on your page to an AJAX form
in a couple of lines of code.  For extra credit, you can use this to
degrade gracefully in the event that the user has JavaScript disabled:
the form still loads, but works as a regular cgi-style page submission!

=head3 C<jQuery.ajax()> for REST

So, you're big into REST, eh?  No problem =)  As you may know, not all
browsers handle DELETE and PUT requests (and jQuery doesn't provide extra
sugar for them).  With a tiny bit of footwork, though, we can side-step the
issue.

jQuery lets you submit forms via GET, POST, PUT, and DELETE.  Sugar is
provided for GET and POST, but I don't use them to keep things uniform
with my PUT and DELETE request.  Let's PUT a user from our registration
form.

	;(function ($) {
		// Passing in a function is the same as passing it into $(document).ready()
		$(function () {
			
			// Find the form
			$("#register-new-user form")
				// Hook into the "on-submit" handler.  Inside this function, "this"
				// refers to the form element.
				.submit(function () {

					function _handleSuccess (data, textStatus, XMLHttpRequest) {
						// ...
					}

					function _handleError (XMLHttpRequest, textStauts, errorThrown) {
						// ...
					}

					$.ajax({
						url:  $(this).attr("action")
					, type: "PUT"
					, data: $(this).serialize()
					, dataType: "json"
					,	success:	_handleSuccess
					,	error:    _handleError
					})
				})
		})
	})

=head3 Roll your own input tabbing

That's all well and good, but what about tabbing?  Our users hate it when the
tabbing is ordered counter-intuitively.  Tabbing should happen in the order
of rendering on the page, right?  Easy enough:

	;(function ($) {
		$(function () {

			// Start our tab indexing at 1.
			var tab_index = 1;

			// Use CSS3 selectors to get every element we want to be included 
			// in the tab train.  Let's exclude hidden fields for obvious reasons.
			$('input,select,button,textarea').not(':hidden')
				.each(function () {
					$(this).attr("tabindex", tabindex++);
				})
		})
	})(jQuery)

Yep; that's it.  Now your page's form elements will tab in order of rendering
on the page.  Of course, you could make it more complex -- I'll leave it as an
exercise to the reader to figure out how to derange his own forms.

=head3 C<Datepicker> (jQuery UI core plugin)

What if we want our user to register his birthday as well, so we can send him 
a coupon for free pizza?  Easy.  Of course, go add the right fields to your
form and the DB.  After that, we'll use jQuery UI's core plugin I<Datepicker>
(L<http://jqueryui.com/demos/datepicker/>) to do the heavy lifting.

Let's assume that your form input has the attribute C<class="date">.  We'll
just attach the date-picker plugin to everything that's an C<input> tag with that class:

	;(function ($) {
		$(function () {
			$("input.date").datepicker();
		})
	})(jQuery)

All done =)  It has sensible defaults to let you navigate the calendar with
the keyboard, supports localization, allows for hooking, and vast arrays of
customization.  Check out the demo at (L<http://jqueryui.com/demos/datepicker/>)
for more information.

=head3 Complex Layouts with C<UI.Layout>

"Oh! Oh!" you pine, "I need a complex layout with many panes and fancy things!
Alas and alack, now I am lost!"

But no!  Check out the venerable UI.Layout plugin (L<http://layout.jquery-dev.net/>)
for jQuery.  It can help you get a multi-paned, collapsible, spectacular
layout with relatively little markup.  It's a I<little> too involved to go
into in this article, but look at the demos and you'll see everything you
need to get started.  It turns out it plays nicely with Catalyst and you
can do magic things with the stash to keep your views simple, your 
controllers light, and your users happy.

=head2 Exercises for the Reader

This has been a I<very> light introduction to using jQuery with Catalyst
applications.  The goal here is to get you past the hurdles of getting
started with jQuery.  With a bit of imagination, you can do some really
neat things; and the interplay between Catalyst and jQuery can be really
productive.

The real win comes when you realize that your HTML should be 
I<semantically meaningful> without any concerns for display.  Separate your
concerns: let Catalyst manage your data and render your pages, let 
CSS handle your display, and let JavaScript handle your interface behaviors.

Every time you find yourself violating one of those boundaries, spend the 
extra ten minutes or two hours to find the root of the problem and solve it
correctly, and you'll find that over time your development and debugging 
time and costs drop, and most of your development time is on enhancements.

Do the Right Thing =)

=head2 Further Reading

A few of suggestions:

=over 

=item Check out the jQuery API (L<http://api.jquery.com/>).

=item Peruse the jQuery UI demos (L<http://jqueryui.com/>).

=item Look at L<HTML::FormHandler> (but don't use dynamic forms =)

=back

Play around with it!  With Catalyst and jQuery, you can get a stable, nice
looking app running in no time.  You already knew that.

There's a chance that I'll be extending this to a more thorough and complete
set of tutorials.  If I do, you'll be able to find them at my blog 
(L<http://snugglepunk.blogspot.com>).

=head2 Get the Files

For your convenience, the files are located here: L<https://github.com/sirrobert/CatalystAdvent-jQueryUI.git>

=head1 Author(s)

Sir Robert Burbridge <sirrobert@gmail.com>

=head2 Contributors

Steve Schafer

=head1 Final words

Merry Christmas!

=cut
