=head1 Integrating Facebook into your Catalyst application

In this article I want to try to give you a small overview of what is it about 
L<Facebook|http://www.facebook.com/> in general, and also about how you can 
easily make a real Facebook application, and some hints about how you 
integrate Facebook into your website (for this part you dont actually need 
Catalyst, but I want to cover it for the overview)

=head2 A small overview of Facebook

To understand what you want from Facebook, you must first see what Facebook 
offers you.

Facebook themself give an overview of all this on the following 
L<Facebook Developers|http://developers.facebook.com/> Page. For you as
Catalyst developer, we can split them into 2 relevant parts: 

The first is the pure website integration of Facebook elements, which is 
covered by the L<Social Plugins|http://developers.facebook.com/plugins/> and
the L<Facebook for Webpages|http://developers.facebook.com/docs/guides/web>
guides on Facebook Developers.

The second is the usage of the APIs of Facebook. Over this way you can read or
modify the Facebook data. Facebook uses here three for us relevant access ways:
L<Graph API|http://developers.facebook.com/docs/reference/api/>,
L<Facebook Query Language|http://developers.facebook.com/docs/reference/fql/>
and the soon hopefully outdated 
L<Old REST API|http://developers.facebook.com/docs/reference/rest/>.

=head1 Integration

Lets play through some cases and explain what you need todo for making them
happen.

=head2 Adding a "Like" button

For the like button and many others of the 
L<Social Plugins|http://developers.facebook.com/plugins/>, you dont even need
an account or application registered on Facebook. The only thing, you need
todo is adding the specific B<iframe>. In the past, you was also able todo
this via FBML, but this is official deprecated and will be dropped by Facebook
at some point. It misses features and will not get new ones.

The B<iframe> solution would look like this inside your L<Template::Toolkit>
L<Catalyst::View::TT> template for any page (best written in one line):

  <iframe src="http://www.facebook.com/widgets/like.php?href=[% c.uri_for | uri %]"
    scrolling="no" frameborder="0"
    style="border:none; width:450px; height:80px"></iframe>

You could put this into B<facebook/like.tt> and always put it somewhere on all
pages where you want a like button with:

  [% INCLUDE facebook/like.tt %]
  
You can finetune the values for it, see more details on the 
L<Like Button|http://developers.facebook.com/docs/reference/plugins/like> Page.

=head2 Getting deeper, become an application

Many social plugins require you to be a real Facebook application. This way
provides you with an application id, and also gives you the way to manage the
content produced by this plugins, for example if you like to integrate the
L<Comments|http://developers.facebook.com/docs/reference/plugins/comments> of
Facebook.

At first you must add an application to your Facebook acount, which you now
need for the further integration. You can do this on your
L<Applications page|http://www.facebook.com/developers/apps.php>. If you want
to add a new application you will be forced to authenticate yourself with your
mobile number, or if this doesn't work, with your credit card number. Facebook
will not charge you anything. Sadly on many mobile networks the short message
sent by Facebook isn't received, so it could be that it never works for you and
you must validate with your credit card number.

After you added your application with the
L<Set Up New Application|http://www.facebook.com/developers/createapp.php>
button on the L<Applications page|http://www.facebook.com/developers/apps.php>,
you will be pushed to the setup of the application. You should go there to
B<Web Site> and give a Site URL and a Site Domain. For example you would give
B<www.example.com> as Site URL and B<example.com> as Site Domain. With this
setup you will be able to use this application also on
B<otherservice.example.com>, if you start splitting up. Of course its also not
bad to fill up the B<About> section of the setup.

Now you should go B<Back to My Applications> for fetching the informations you
later need for the further integration. Best is you let this page open, so that
you always can copy and paste what you need.

=head2 Integrating Catalyst::Model::Facebook

The best way to now use this application informations in Catalyst is
L<Catalyst::Model::Facebook>. Not just, cause I made it ;), cause its wrapping
around L<Facebook>, which is really more a wrapper for all existing Facebook
solutions on CPAN. With a little spice which will help us in the following
steps.

For making the Model in Catalyst you need to use the create command of your
application, after installing L<Catalyst::Model::Facebook>:

  script/myapp_create.pl model MyFacebook Facebook APPLICATION_ID_FROM_FACEBOOK API_KEY_FROM_FACEBOOK APPLICATION_SECRET_FROM_FACEBOOK

Where B<MyFacebook> is the name of the Model you want to generate. If you
want to use now the Facebook modules L<WWW::Facebook::API> or
L<Facebook::Graph>. Best is you just install both, so that you never need
to think about it deeper. Don't forget to also add them to your requirements
of your application. The Facebook package itself doesnt require both of them,
but throws an error if you try to use the method of them. I often forget that,
cause both modules are normally installed in my environment :).

B<Warning>: Please do not put the code of your application public if you create
the model this way. Facebook don't want that you make your secret public, cause
this makes it possible for others to make stuff on Facebook in behalf of your
application, which in the long line comes down to your personal name. Best is
to exclude the application ID and the application secret from outside, like
environment and replace this in your MyFacebook model, like using
$ENV{MYAPP_MYFACEBOOK_APP_ID} or in that direction and set them on the
environment.

=head2 Using Catalyst::Model::Facebook independent

After you have installed your own L<Catalyst::Model::Facebook>, you can now
already talk to Facebook and fetch public available informations directly. For
example you could do this in one controller:

  $c->stash->{gettys_facebook_profile} = $c->model('MyFacebook')->graph->query
    ->find(100001153174797)
	->include_metadata
    ->request
    ->as_hashref;

And later in your template:

  [% gettys_facebook_profile.name %]
  
And you will get B<Torsten Raudssus>, which is the name of my Facebook Profile.
The usage of B<include_metadata> adds some more information, also a longer
description about every field that you are getting from the profile. You should
not use this in production later, so that you spare resources on the request.

For more informations what you can do with the Graph API, you could checkout
L<Facebook::Graph> and the informations on the Facebook
L<Graph API Documentation|http://developers.facebook.com/docs/reference/api/>.

=head2 Integrating Facebook Javascript SDK for the advanced Social Plugins

Now we also need to integrate the Facebook Javascript SDK, for having the
possibility to bind the Facebook login to our application and also for the
other more advanced Social Plugins, like comments and discussion boards.

You need to integrate the following snippet on top inside the <body> tag of 
your structure template:

  <div id="fb-root"></div>
  <script src="http://connect.facebook.net/en_US/all.js"></script>
  <script>/* <![CDATA[ */
  
    FB.init({
      appId  : '[% c.model('MyFacebook').app_id %]',
      status : true, // check login status
      cookie : true, // enable cookies to allow the server to access the session
      xfbml  : true  // parse XFBML
    });
  
  /* ]]> */</script>

Don't put the JavaScript include in the <head> of your HTML, you will get into
problems, just add it like Facebook suggests. Of course, you can use other
locales, if Facebook offers them. Just test it out with replacing B<en_US> with
your language locales definition (or the one the user has choosen for use on
your webpage).

The B<FB.Event.subscribe> will be used to reload the page when the user has
logged in using Facebook. You can of course make other stuff here, but this is
for the beginning the most easy solution. We will integrate the login in the
next step.

If you want to get more debugging informations out of the Javascript SDK, you
can use B<http://static.ak.fbcdn.net/connect/en_US/core.debug.js> as the
javascript include, but this one is only available in en_US locale.

For more detailed information about the integration you can checkout the
L<Javascript SDK Documentation|http://developers.facebook.com/docs/reference/javascript/>.

=head2 Adding the login button to your page

If you now want to go a step further, you can now make a login button for
Facebook on your page. Beside that you actually know which Facebook user is on
your page, you can also now make API requests on behalf of the user, which
means that you are using the Facebook database depending on the rights the user
gave you like the user would do it. This can also give you more information,
cause you access the Facebook API with the rights of the user.

Generally its a good advice to try as much requests as possible on behalf of a
user so that Facebook doesn't see your application as a kind of information
leaker.

The implementation itself is now a bit of a problem in the current state of
Facebook. Technical you only get official good documentation, which uses FBML,
but on the other side on the FBML page you get the information that you should
use the L<Javascript SDK|http://developers.facebook.com/docs/reference/javascript/>.
Interesting is also stuff like
L<Custom User Registration|http://developers.facebook.com/docs/user_registration>,
which allows you to let Facebook store extra fields the user most give on your
registration process. It can be integrated over a simple B<iframe>.

So I made up a solution that works, and shows you a bit of the concept, and
also gives you a good base to go on with your own way. You definitly should
come up with something more clear for yourself :). I use the help of jQuery in
this example, cause we need some click events, and the usage of onclick, would
make me seriously sick. Lets make a very simple HTML structure for this:

  <div class="header">
    [% IF c.model('MyFacebook').uid %]
      You are logged in with uid [% c.model('MyFacebook').uid %]
    [% ELSE %]
      You are not logged in, who the hell are you?
    [% END %]
  </div>
  <div id="login">
    [% IF c.model('MyFacebook').uid %]
      LOGOUT
    [% ELSE %]
      LOGIN VIA FACEBOOK
    [% END %]
  </div>

Also we extend our B<FB.init> JavaScript block with the following JavaScript
code:

  FB.Event.subscribe('auth.sessionChange', function(response) {
    // do something when the user logs in or logs out
    // for a start a page reload is the best solution ;)
    window.location.reload();
  });

  $(function(){

    $('#login').click(function(){
      if (FB.getSession()) {
        FB.logout();
      } else {
        FB.login();
      }
    });

  });
  
=head2 Testing your application in development stage

So for testing your application without touching the live information, you need
a bit more stress. I suggest to register 2 applications at Facebook and just
use in the development environment the different application id and secret.
This way you can make a development database, and use test accounts on Facebook
without risking to make your live application dirty. Especially the management
of the tokens you get from the Facebook users and the access rights they give
to you, could make problems. Even tho i must say, I'm open for good suggestions
and tricks for the development stage, just visit me on IRC, if you want to talk
deeper about this.

=head2 And there is more...

There are much more possibilities that you can do with Facebook in context of
Catalyst. Soon I will make a HowTo for Canvas applications with Catalyst, you
should follow the Facebook package development to see when its there. Its
available on L<https://github.com/Getty/p5-facebook>. A sample Catalyst project
where you just need to replace the Facebook application API key, App id and
secret with your own, you can get from
L<https://github.com/Getty/p5-catalystadvent-facebook>.

Just join us on irc.perl.org in the channel #facebook or contact me on 
Facebook L<http://www.facebook.com/raudssus> ;).

Have fun and B<MERRY CHRISTMAS!> :).

=head1 See also

L<Facebook::Manual>
L<Facebook::Graph>
L<WWW::Facebook::API>
L<Catalyst::Model::Facebook>

=head1 Author

Torsten Raudssus <torsten@raudssus.de> L<http://www.raudssus.de/>. You can find me on irc.perl.org 
#facebook or #catalyst as C<Getty>.
