=head1 A Tour of DBIx::Class::Helpers

=head2 Hello!

L<DBIx::Class> is one of the most popular ORMs used in Perl and
Catalyst development; it is remarkably flexible and useful. But there
is a price for that flexibility: often things that are concise in
other ORMs are complex in L<DBIx::Class>.

L<DBIx::Class::Helpers> aim at solving the complexity problem as
succinctly as possible. As our good friend mst might say, they allow
you to code less so you can get down to the pub earlier :-)

So without further ado, I will start with the first, most basic helper...

=head2 IgnoreWantarray

L<DBIx::Class::Helper::IgnoreWantarray> has the longest name, but the
most basic functionality: it takes away the context sensitivity of C<<
$rs->search >>.  Why would a person ever want to do that? Well, in array
context, C<< $rs->search >> will return an array of your database. You
might not want that. I often write code like the following:

 return $self->sort(
   $self->paginate(
      $self->schema->resultset('Parts')
   )
 );

Unfortunately, this often means that instead of passing another
resultset to C<< $self->sort >>, I end up passing the database
instead.  This confounds me and my coworkers enough that I'd rather
call C<< $rs->all >> if I need the actual results. C<IgnoreWantarray>
makes search always return a resultset.

=head2 JoinTable

L<DBIx::Class::Helper::JoinTable> was one of the first components in
the Helper suite.  Its name should make its purpose obvious. Any time
you have a many-to-many relationship, you must have a table joining
those two sets of items.  An example could be users and roles.  Users
have many roles; roles have many users.  The correct way to program
this relationship is with a join
table. L<DBIx::Class::Helper::JoinTable> makes creating these tables
extremely easy.  And because L<DBIx::Class> allows us to call
C<add_columns> more than once, it's a cinch to add data other than the
relationship.

An example might be an award given from a school. We have a Student
table, a School table, an Award table, and a Student_Award table. The
Student_Award table should join Student and Award, but might as well
contain the date the award was conferred and maybe some information
about why the student received the award.

=head2 Random

L<DBIx::Class::Helper::Random> exists to serve a fairly basic need:
picking random rows from a given table. Currently it only returns a
single row, but soon, hopefully, L<DBIx::Class> will support the
necessary machinations to return a resultset of random rows.

=head2 SubClass

L<DBIx::Class::Helper::SubClass> is certainly the most complex of
these components, but I would argue it is the most important as
well. This component allows B<almost> seamless subclassing of
C<DBIx::Class> ResultSources.  It does things like C<<
__PACKAGE__->table( __PACKAGE__->table ) >>, which are annoying and
unsightly, as well as more complex things, like recreating
relationships based on the parent class.

At work I'd like to define a set of tables for authorization - users,
roles, permissions, and join tables between them. I do not want to
copy and paste this code to our many disparate
projects. L<DBIx::Class::Helper::SubClass> solves the problem nicely.

Another reason to use this helper is to define a table without certain
columns (TEXT columns come to mind). Instead of redefining the table
with the text columns in another place, you might use this helper to
subclass the one without the text columns and add text columns to the
child class.

=head2 VirtualView

L<DBIx::Class::Helper::VirtualView> is the most conceptually complex
of the Helper components. Its purpose is mostly to clean up data
returned from a resultset. I won't go into all the gory details here.
For an idea of how it works see the POD and tests.

=head2 Extensibility

In writing these components I've tried to make parts overrideable in
the spirit of L<DBIx::Class>. For example, if you do not like that
join tables have an underscore between table names, you could subclass
L<DBIx::Class::Helper::JoinTable>, override C<set_table>, and then use your
subclassed module to name your tables as you please.

=head1 Author

Arthur Axel "fREW" Schmidt <frioux@gmail.com>

